---
layout: post
title: "Backbone.js: Internals Summary"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- mvc
- tutorials
- backbone.js
- code-review
---

Over the last month we've looked at Backbone's internals in detail.  This post summarises these findings.

To recap, here's a list of all the parts in _Backbone.js: Hacker's Guide_:

* [Part 1](http://dailyjs.com/2012/07/19/mvstar-2/): Setup, Events, Models
* [Part 2](http://dailyjs.com/2012/07/26/mvstar-3/): Constructor, Inheritance, Collections, Chainable API
* [Part 3](http://dailyjs.com/2012/08/02/mvstar-4/): Router, History, Views
* [Part 4](http://dailyjs.com/2012/08/09/mvstar-5/): Inheritance, Sync

###Leverage Events

Backbone's classes are designed to be inherited from.  Every single one of these classes inherits from `Backbone.Events`:

* `Backbone.Model`
* `Backbone.Collection`
* `Backbone.Router`
* `Backbone.History`
* `Backbone.View`

That means when designing applications built with Backbone, events are a key architectural component.  Events are the standard way to deal with user interface actions, through the declarative event bindings on views, and also model and collection changes.  However, you can easily add your own custom events.

When learning Backbone it's important to get a feel for the built-in event names.  Incorrectly binding a collection `reset` event, for example, could cause your application to render more often than it should.  Mastering events is one of the quickest ways to become more productive with Backbone.

###Underscore.js

Since Backbone depends on Underscore, it's worth keeping this in mind when dealing with any kind of arrays or collections of data.  Also, familiarity with Underscore's methods will help work with `Backbone.Collection` effectively.

###Views

It's easy to slip into using `$`, but avoid this where possible.  Backbone caches a view's element, so use `this.$el` instead.  Design views based on the [single responsibility principle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle).

It might be tempting to let "container" view render HTML directly by using `$().html`, but resisting the temptation and creating a hierarchy of views will make it _much_ easier to debug your code and write automated tests.

Interestingly, Backbone doesn't have a lot of code dedicated to templates, but it can work with the [template](http://underscorejs.org/#template) method.  I use this with [RequireJS text file dependencies](http://requirejs.org/docs/api.html#text) to load remote templates during development, then I use the RequireJS build script to generate something suitable for deployment.  This makes code easy to test and fast to load.

###API Style

Backbone's API is thankfully very consistent.  Even the history API accepts a `silent` option, which is used throughout the library to stop events from firing when they're not required.

Backbone's collections have Underscore's chainable API, which can be handy, [but care must be taken to use this correctly](http://dailyjs.com/2012/07/26/mvstar-3/).

###Testing Backbone

So far I've been reviewing Backbone's code to demystify the framework as a whole.  However, it's worth noting that other technologies work very well with Backbone and Underscore.  RequireJS and AMD modules can be a great way to break up projects.

However, one area that Backbone doesn't address is testing.  This is unfortunate, because testing Backbone projects definitely isn't obvious.  In [Unit Testing Backbone.js Apps With QUnit And SinonJS](http://addyosmani.com/blog/unit-testing-backbone-js-apps-with-qunit-and-sinonjs/), Addy Osmani describes one method in detail.

I have the following rules for testing Backbone projects:

1. The full application should be running during testing
2. Tests shouldn't depend on any markup in the test harness HTML file (or as little as possible)
3. Tests shouldn't touch the network for data

The second rule in particular is aided by using templates loaded by RequireJS and avoiding those pesky calls to `$()` in views.
