---
layout: post
title: "JavaScript Allongé"
author: Alex Young
categories:
- books
---

[JavaScript Allongé](https://leanpub.com/javascript-allonge) by Reginald Braithwaite is a free book that focuses on using functions to write simpler JavaScript with less bugs:

> JavaScript Allongé provides recipes for using functions to write software that is simpler, cleaner, and less complicated than alternative approaches that are object-centric or code-centric. JavaScript idioms like function combinators and decorators leverage JavaScript's power to make code easier to read, modify, debug and refactor, thus avoiding problems before they happen.

I found the author's blog post, [JavaScript Allonge is Free](http://braythwayt.com/2013/10/01/javascript-allonge-is-free.html), interesting and inspiring.  Technical authors don't often get to air the stories behind their work, but Reginald goes into a lot of detail behind JavaScript Allongé and how his life has changed since publishing it:

> And as a bonus, I got my dream job, and now it's time for me to walk the freedom talk. I'm now working for a company that is trying its dambdest to help every single programmer on the planet write more software and better software. And we give something away, crossing our fingers that more software and better software will be a good thing and that we'll make enough to keep doing what we do.

> I believe in this. That's why I write, and that's why I work at GitHub. And you helped me get here:

It's encouraging to hear that such a talented writer and programmer has landed his dream job and become part of the GitHub animated gif squad.

> Part of why I believed in myself enough to go through the terrors of interviewing for my job is the confidence you the readers gave me when you supported my books and told me that the ideas I was trying to share were useful. I can't thank you enough for that.

The book is available as a PDF, ePub, and Kindle-friendly mobile file.
