---
layout: post
title: "Generators and Suspend"
author: "Alex Young"
categories: 
- node
- modules
- es6
---

[ECMAScript 6 generators](http://wiki.ecmascript.org/doku.php?id=harmony:generators) are at the draft stage, and available in Node 0.11 when `node` is run with `--harmony` or `--harmony-generators`.  Generators are "first-class coroutines" -- think functions that can be postponed and resumed.

Generators are denoted with `function*`, and return values by calling `yield`.  The value isn't really returned: `yield` could be placed inside a loop, and then `generator.next()` is called to fetch the yielded value.  The generator is said to be an _iterator_ -- it could be provided as the expression to an iteration statement like `for`:

{% highlight javascript %}
function* generator() {
  for (;;) {
    yield someValue;
  }
}

for (var value of generator()) {
  // Do something with `value`,
  // then `break` when enough values have been yielded
}
{% endhighlight %}

The ECMAScript 6 wiki has a Fibonacci sequence example, but generators don't really hit their conceptual stride until you start hooking generators up to other generators.  The classic example of this is consumer-producer relationships: generators that produce values, and then consumers that use them.  The two generators are said to be _symmetric_ -- a continuous evaluation where coroutines yield to each other, rather than two functions that _call_ each other.

Jeremy Martin sent in a small but novel module based on generators called suspend (GitHub: [jmar777 / suspend](https://github.com/jmar777/suspend), License: _MIT_, npm: [suspend](https://npmjs.org/package/suspend)).  As it needs Node 0.11 and for Node to be run with `--harmony`, let's just say it's academically interesting for now.

You can think of _suspend_ as an early example of generators that feature an idiomatic Node API:

{% highlight javascript %}
// async without suspend
async.map(['file1','file2','file3'], fs.stat, function(err, results) {
  // results is now an array of stats for each file
});

// async with suspend
var res = yield async.map(['file1','file2','file3'], fs.stat, resume);
{% endhighlight %}

Here the [async](https://npmjs.org/package/async) module has been modified to use _suspend_, resulting in more concise code.

> suspend is "red light, green light" for asynchronous code execution. `yield` means stop, and `resume` means go.

If this sounds familiar, that's because it's not semantically too different to [node-fibers](https://github.com/laverdet/node-fibers).  The node-fibers documentation includes a comparison between the ES6 generators example and its own syntax.

This is the entire source to _suspend_:

{% highlight javascript %}
var suspend = module.exports = function suspend(generator, opts) {
  opts || (opts = {});

  return function start() {
    Array.prototype.unshift.call(arguments, function resume(err) {
      if (opts.throw) {
        if (err) return iterator.throw(err);
        iterator.send(Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments, 1));
      } else {
        iterator.send(Array.prototype.slice.call(arguments));
      }
    });
    var iterator = generator.apply(this, arguments);
    iterator.next();
  };
};
{% endhighlight %}

The `suspend` function accepts a generator and returns a function.  The callback supplied to `suspend` will be passed the `resume` function, which accepts an error argument to fit Node's callback API style.  The user-supplied callback can then call `yield` on an asynchronous function that accepts `resume` as its callback, allowing Node's core modules (or any other asynchronous methods) to be used in a synchronous style:

{% highlight javascript %}
suspend(function* (resume) {
  var data = yield fs.readFile(__filename, resume);
})();
{% endhighlight %}

I liked this twist on generators, and I think modules like this will start to become more important in the JavaScript community over the next few years.
