---
layout: post
title: "From fs.readFile to read(2)"
author: Alex Young
categories:
- node
- libuv
- unix
---

Here's a statement you might hear used to describe Node:

> Node uses asynchronous I/O to avoid using threads for fast filesystem and network operations.

This statement is false (in more ways than one), and understanding why will help you better understand Node.

First, consider the question: what is asynchronous?

{% highlight javascript %}
fs.readFile('file.txt', function(err, data) {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log(data);
});
{% endhighlight %}

That is an asynchronous API.  The program will continue running after the `fs.readFile`.  The callback may be run at some point in the future.  As JavaScript programmers we like this because JavaScript's scoping rules mean the callback gets a closure, so we find it easy to reason about what variables are available to the callback, while being able to do thing while something potentially slow (I/O, web requests) responds.

Even if you're not a Node programmer, you're probably comfortable with the last example.  It's not amazingly different to a jQuery Ajax request, where callbacks are passed to `$.ajax`.

Now, assuming you're not a C/C++ programmer and don't know too much about Node's internals, here's the amazing thing about `fs.readFile` -- it calls a (potentially) blocking system call.

How is that possible?  We know our program continues when we try to read a file, so what's going on?   The first step is to look at Node's `fs` source.

###Bindings

If you look at the source for `fs.readFile` in [lib/fs.js](https://github.com/joyent/node/blob/v0.10.19-release/lib/fs.js#L182), you'll see `binding.read`.  Whenever you see `binding` in Node's core modules you're looking at a portal into the land of C++.  This binding is made available using `NODE_SET_METHOD(target, "read", Read)`.  If you know any C, you might think this is a macro -- it was originally, but it's now a function.  The reference to `Read` here is a C++ function in [src/node_file.cc](https://github.com/joyent/node/blob/v0.10.19-release/src/node_file.cc#L723).

Like other filesystem code in Node, `Read` defines a synchronous and asynchronous version using `ASYNC_CALL` and `SYNC_CALL`.  These are macros used to bind to libuv.  If you dig into libuv, which you can find in `deps/uv` or on GitHub at [joyent / libuv](https://github.com/joyent/libuv), then you'll discover something interesting: the filesystem code actually uses libuv's own streams, buffers, and native filesystem wrapping code.

###Filesystem Wrapping

Going back to `ASYNC_CALL` in `Read`, one of the arguments is `read`: the syscall `read` (help: `man 2 read`).  But wait, doesn't this function block?  Yes, but that's not the end of the story.  As summarised in [An Introduction to libuv](http://nikhilm.github.io/uvbook/filesystem.html):

> The libuv filesystem operations are different from socket operations. Socket operations use the non-blocking operations provided by the operating system. Filesystem operations use blocking functions internally, but invoke these functions in a thread pool and notify watchers registered with the event loop when application interaction is required.

Let's look a little deeper.  The `ASYNC_CALL` macro uses `FSReqWrap` and calls `uv_fs_` methods.  The one that gets bound to for reading is `uv_fs_read`:

{% highlight c %}
int uv_fs_read(uv_loop_t* loop, uv_fs_t* req,
               uv_file file,
               void* buf,
               size_t len,
               int64_t off,
               uv_fs_cb cb) {
  INIT(READ);
  req->file = file;
  req->buf = buf;
  req->len = len;
  req->off = off;
  POST;
}
{% endhighlight %}

What's that `POST` macro at the end?  It checks to see if a callback has been provided, and if so uses `uv__work_submit` from `src/unix/threadpool.c` to read the file in a thread queue.  Notice I'm just talking about Unix here, but in following `fs.readFile` down to the syscall that does the work it's interesting to find `uv__work_submit`.

In this example the Node API method `fs.readFile` is asynchronous, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's non-blocking underneath.  As the libuv book points out, socket (network) code is non-blocking, but filesystems are more complicated.  Some things are event-based (kqueue), others use threads, and I'm currently trying to work out what Windows is doing (I'm only a libuv tourist for now).

I'm collating my notes on libuv for a talk on Node's internals at [The Great British Node Conference](http://greatbritishnodeconf.co.uk/).  The talk started more as a walkthrough of the core modules and `binding`, but I enjoyed looking at libuv in more detail so hopefully I can fit some of this stuff in there.  It'd be good to see you there!
