---
layout: post
title: "WebRTC Video Mixing with Mixology"
author: "Alex Young"
categories:
- webrtc
- video
- streaming
---

Gearcloud Labs has open sourced their [Mixology](http://gearcloudlabs.com/mixology-sdk-documentation/) project under an MIT license.  The source is available on GitHub: [gearcloudlabs / Mixology](https://github.com/gearcloudlabs/Mixology).

This project allows video streams to be combined using a Node server.  It uses WebRTC, the W3C standard for browser video, audio, and P2P.  Google recently switched Google Hangouts over to WebRTC, which you can try in developer builds of Chrome:

> Google+ Hangouts no longer requires a separate plugin to be installed in Chrome for video and voice chat to work. Using the Web Real-Time Communication API (WebRTC) and Native Client (NaCl) Google is able to provide a native video chat experience out of the box in Chrome.

- [Google Hangouts Plugin No Longer Needed in Chrome](http://www.omgchrome.com/google-hangouts-chrome-plugin-free-2/)

Mixology uses collections of web pages that communicate using WebRTC.  There's an additional manifest file written with JSON that defines how streams are mixed:

{% highlight javascript %}
{
  "channelName": "Your mix name",
  "topology": ["filename-basename.output-streamname | filename-basename.input-streamname", ...],
  "partitionSize": integer
}
{% endhighlight %}

The Node project uses Express and Socket.IO.  It's currently a monolithic file with no dependencies, so it expects you to have Express and Socket.IO installed globally.  Refactoring it into a more modular Express application might be a nice exercise for someone looking to contribute to an open source project...
