---
layout: post
title: "Lo-Dash v3, g5-knockout.js"
author: Alex Young
categories:
- lo-dash
- libraries
- articles
- knockout
---

###Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger Lo-Dash v3

I've noticed that Lo-Dash is a popular module on npm, and it's recently had a major release for version 3.0.  This version brings some new features and interesting internal changes.

Gajus Kuizinas sent in [Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger Lo-Dash v3](http://gajus.com/blog/4/harder-better-faster-stronger-lo-dash-v3), a post that explores version 3, like lazy evaluation, pipeline computing, deferred execution, and newly available methods.

> Version 3 is the biggest update to Lo-Dash ever3. With ever increasing user base, modular code base, and cross-browser compatibility, Lo-Dash is the go-to utility library for years to come. With that in mind, there is an going competition with lazy.js and undescore.js, both of which are in active development.

###Knockout/Browserify Base App with Events

Working with Knockout and Browserify is a pretty solid choice for many client-side projects, but because these are libraries rather than frameworks you need to know what you're doing before getting started.  Greg Babula has created [g5-knockout.js](https://github.com/gbabula/g5-knockout) which you can use as a foundation for your next MVVM project.  It includes an event bus for decoupling, and this is based on Node's `events` module, which is made possible thanks to Browserify.  I also noticed Greg uses Lo-Dash.

[Greg included a blog post](https://medium.com/@gregbabula/knockout-browserify-base-app-mvvm-with-an-event-layer-7b0996eb4d0a) in his submission which explains the concept and decisions behind the main dependencies.  You can look at the source to see things like how view models are made.
